
This is information for the $300 solar node protype specific to the R910 and Sprint 4G LTE subscription.

# External watchdog

The R910 cannot be configured to turn itself on when the battery has been charged back up. Since we can't guarantee that the battery will never drop below the level that causes the R910 to turn off we need an external device to turn the R910 back on.

The external watchdog needs to periodically check if the R910 is off and battery voltage is high enough for it to be turned back on, then turn the R910 back on by simulating a power button press and hold.

The watchdog should preferably be a 1.8 V logic level device for a few reasons:

* It needs to run on a supply voltage between 3.1 and 4.2 V
* It needs to detect the 1.8 V on voltage of the R910
* We might in the future want it talk to the R910 over serial

It probably still could be a 3.3 V device since they can often operate on a bit less than 3.3 V, but it could get tight with a 3.1 V supply and a voltage regulator which probably needs at least 0.2 volts difference, leaving us with 2.9 V. Detecting 1.8 V is also not hard on a 3.3 V device, it just requies a support component or two. Lower voltage doesn't necessarily mean less power consumption here since we're using a voltage regulator (though we could use something more efficient if it becomes an issue).

## 1.8 V arduino

Here's [a guide](https://www.iot-experiments.com/arduino-pro-mini-1mhz-1-8v/) for how to reprogram a 3.3 V arduino pro mini to 1.8 V. It will work for any Atmega 328P.

The guide uses a purpose-built ISP to low-level program the arduino but the simpler solution is to use another 3.3 V arduino as the programmer using the ArduinoISP method.

The [Engbedded AVR Fuse Calculator](http://www.engbedded.com/fusecalc) is really useful for figuring out how to set fuses on AVR devices.

Here are the fuse settings we used.

Fuse Low Byte (FSL):

* Don't divide clock by 8: CKDIV8=1
* Clock output off: CKOUT=1
* Slowest startup time at 65 ms: SUT=10
* Enable the internal oscillator at 128 kHz: CKSEL=0011

So FSL is 11100011 or 0xE3

Fuse High Byte (FHB):

* Disable boot reset vector since we don't use a bootloader: BOOTRST=1
* Everything else at defaults

Sp HFB is 0xDB

Extended Fuse Byte (EFB):

* Disable brown-out detection: BODLEVEL=111

So EFB is 11111111 or 0xFF

Here's the `avrdude` command-line to program the e-fuses:

```
avrdude -P /dev/ttyUSB0 -c avrisp -p m328p -b 19200 -U lfuse:w:<0xE3>:m -U hfuse:w:<0xDB>:m -U efuse:w:<0xFF>:m
``

To program the sketch:

```
avrdude -P /dev/ttyUSB0 -c avrisp -p m328p -b 19200 -U flash:w:watchdog.hex
```

## Accessing 1.8 V when device is off

Unfortunately only the direct battery voltage seems to be accessible outside of the cans when the device is off so we need to use a separate 1.8 V regulator.

## Turning on

The on button seems to be the only place where an electrical connection for turning the device on is exposed. When looking at the side of the PCB with the button, with the "WIFI 1" text right side up, the button is at the top left. It has four attachment points. The top two and bottom left pads are all ground. The bottom right pad is the pin that needs to be tied to ground to turn on the device. It needs to be tied to ground for several seconds or the boot process will halt.

None of the exposed pads on either side of the PCB seem to be connected to the "turn on" pad, so unfortunately we have to solder to the tiny pin right next to the button.

## Detecting if the hotspot is on

There are a bunch of pads to the top right on the same side of the PCB as the "WIFI 1" text. The fifth pad from the top left is 1.8 V when the device is on and 0 V when it is off.


# Antennas

## Antenna connectors

We think the R910 hotspot uses MS162 antenna connectors. There's a github repo that claims they use TS9, and it's possible to get TS9 to fit with a bunch of work but it really doesn't seem like the right connector. MS162 is also a very snug fit but less so than TS9 and it stays on a lot better + the MS162 plugs are long enough to fit through the plastic of the case which is not quite the case with the TS9 plugs we've tried.

There is a seller on ebay called `wifi_expert` who sells MS162 pigtails to pretty much any antenna connector you can imagine, and they use RG316 cable and are based in California.

The R910 has six connectors total:

* Two dedicated to B41
* Two shared for B25 and B26
* Two for WiFi

The WiFi can be set to either 2.4 GHz or 5.8 GHz and also both at the same time. It's unclear if it has separate radios for the two (according to `iw phy` it doesn't) but either way they share the same antennas.

## 4G LTE

Sprint uses the following 4G LTE channels in the U.S:

* B26 - 859-894 MHz
* B25 - 1930-1995 MHz
* B41 - 2496-2670 MHz

It looks like most of their towers in the East Bay use all three frequencies.

There are TWO Sprint towers within a block of People's Park and they support all three frequencies.

Before we realized the R910 connectors probably aren't TS9 we ordered [this from ebay](https://www.ebay.com/itm/35dBi-4G-LTE-Booster-Ampllifier-MIMO-Antenna-TS9-Telstra-Optus-for-Huawei-ZTE/302680390516) and [one of these](https://www.ebay.com/itm/4G-3G-Antenna-28dbi-SMA-TS9-for-USB-LTE-Modem-MiFi-Mobile-WiFi-Router-Hotspot-US/254331707508). The dBi ratings on those are definitely completely fake and we haven't yet tested them to see how they actually work.

Currently our prototype is using [these N-type Omni-directional antennas from ltefix](https://ltefix.com/shop/antennas/4g-lte-antennas/omni-directional/700-2700mhz-terminal-3-5dbi-4dbi-4g-lte-omni-antenna-vertical-n-male/).

We're connecting them using [https://www.ebay.com/itm/RG316-N-Female-Bulkhead-Angle-to-MS162-Male-Angle-Coax-RF-Cable-USA-Ship/133141212174](these pigtails).

Since we're connecting them to band 41 only it would be better to use 2500 to 2700 MHz antennas but no-one really sells those. We should maybe just make those ourselves or trim some 2.4 GHz antennas a bit.
